# The Problem of Feelings

As part of my clinical training in graduate school, one of my supervisors watched my therapy sessions through a one-way mirror. One day my client smiled in a peculiar way, which I was sure was significant. I was even more certain that my supervisor would have thought the smile important, too, and that he was sure to ask about it in my supervision session the next day. As I drove home that night, I tried furiously to figure out the significance of that smile, without much success. At one point I tried smiling the way my client had done. That did not help much, so I tried smiling the way I normally do, and I noticed something interesting: When I deliberately smiled, it made me feel happier. So I tried an angry frown, and that made me feel angry; a sad, slumped posture made me feel sad, and so forth. This seemed remarkable, since I knew as well as anyone else that the relationship between expressions and feelings was supposed to be the reverse: Feelings were the causes of facial expressions.

But by the time I reached home, I was convinced that at least sometimes feelings were the results, rather than the causes, of expressions. (I have often wondered what the other drivers thought of me as I drove away from a mental health facility making dramatic emotional faces for no apparent reason.)
Over the next few weeks I spent as much time as I could reading the emotion literature, trying to find out if others had experienced the same thing. Eventually I discovered William James's theory of emotion. James expressed his point of view elegantly in talking about emotional feelings: Common sense says, we lose our fortune, are sorry and weep; we meet a bear, are frightened and run; we are insulted by a rival, are angry and strike. The hypothesis here to be defended says that this order of sequence is incorrect . . . and the more rational statement is that we feel sorry because we cry, angry because we strike, afraid because we tremble. (James, 1890, p. 449, emphasis in original) I had discovered that my experience was not unique. Indeed, one of psychology's greatest pioneers had reported just this kind of experience. James's view of emotion is the core of the position that I will be describing throughout this book: that our feelings are the consequences of our actions. They are about our actions, and they are in fact no more or less than knowledge or information about our actions. The way you know that you are angry is through your angry behavior, and the way I know that I am happy is because I smile. The only difference is that I experience my own smile as the feeling of happiness. We know our own minds by observing our own behavior.

Of course, as James pointed out, common sense takes a very different view. According to common sense, feelings are the causes of behaviors, and we commonly use feelings to explain behavior: "I ran from the bear because I was terrified." "You eat because you are hungry." "Enraged by the insult, he couldn't help attacking." "She works so hard because she enjoys her work." "He acts like an idiot because he's in love." (See Figure 1.1.) Though familiar, ubiquitous, and easy, explanations based on feelings contain a great mystery: We really do not know how feelings could affect behavior. Feelings are not mechanical forces, or fluids that might build up pressure, or any other kind of matter or energy that might cause some physical object to move. So, although clearly feelings do have some intimate, and undoubtedly important, connection with behavior and action, the nature of that connection is not as clear as common sense assumes.

Figure 1.1. Common sense and William James: models of emotion sequence.

The goal of this book is to describe a view of feelings that derives from my experience driving home, from James's theory of emotion, from Gilbert Ryle's philosophical work on the nature of mind, and from many other sources. One of the great benefits of this theoretical perspective is that it dissolves the mystery of how feelings can cause actions. However, this dis-solution does not come cheaply, since it involves turning common sense on its head, and common sense is what we all "know" is true until we hear good arguments to the contrary. Consequently, many readers will approach this book with an appropriately high degree of skepticism and will demand some very compelling evidence for such an unlikely idea. As we will see, a large and growing body of research does in fact exist. This research demonstrates that feelings follow from behavior or other underlying processes. The feelings that have been studied include a wide variety of emotions, including anger, joy, sadness, disgust, fear, guilt, and romantic love. Two very large bodies of research have shown similar effects of many kinds of behavior on attitudes and on motives; this research shows that acting as if you believe something leads you to that belief, and acting as if you like something makes you like it. Other research has examined feelings of confidence and pride, and feelings of familiarity, importance, and even realness. Indeed, few if any of those things that we would ordinarily call
"feelings" have escaped the research net, and in every case the evidence is that the feelings are the consequences of the behaviors or activities that common sense would identify as effects of the feelings.

After the opening barrage of research (and some theoretical bits tucked in among the facts), I will try to draw together all this into a coherent, overall theoretical statement. The label that seems to make most sense for this position is self-perception theory, for reasons that will become apparent shortly. Finally, I will discuss some of the broader implications of this work.

Before getting on to the details of the research work and its theoretical implications, I will briefly sketch the conceptual problems of common sense that generated this research. I will also present a quick overview of the general theoretical position that has emerged from all this research, so that the reader can see where we are headed. Because many of the theoretical ideas have emerged directly from the empirical work, I have post-poned until chapter 10 the full, detailed statement of self-perception theory as I now understand it. The final theoretical interpretation that seems to make most sense contains at its heart James's premise that feelings follow and are based on behaviors. As you might expect, though, the final version of self-perception theory is a great deal more complicated.

## THE PROBLEMS OF COMMON SENSE

James explicitly contrasts his views with common sense, so common sense is a good place to start. Calling some idea common sense implies that it has always been accepted truth. In fact, however, there is at least some reason to think that our commonsense view of mind and feelings came into existence
during the span of recorded history. According to Bruno Snell (1982), some time around 1000 bc to 800 bc, the ancient Greeks "invented" the idea that human beings consisted of two quite distinct things, mind and body (see also Jaynes, 1976). In simple dualism, the world is assumed to contain two kinds of substances, physical and mental. Physical substances are palpable, located in space and time, and observed equally well by anyone who is present. Mental substances are not physical and exist in a kind of "space" that is unobservable, except by the person whose mind it is. Certainly, that dualist view has been dominant and explicit in Western thinking since Descartes (1641/1990). A kind of parody of this dualist view is that mind and body are like a horse and rider. The observable body moves and acts in response to the urgings and commands of the immaterial mind.

The Greeks' explanation of human behavior was closely parallel to their ways of explaining other regularities of nature. The Greeks were animists who explained regularities in nature by assuming that some person or personlike god had been put in charge of things. For example, the Greeks noticed that the sun rose regularly and assumed that there must be a person, whom they named Apollo, in charge of driving his golden char-iot across the sky each day. The crops grew during some seasons but not others, so the Greeks imagined there was a person in charge of growth, a person who took half the year off from work.

The Greeks seem to have adopted a similar explanatory strategy to account for the behavior of people. People's actions were explained as due to the presence of a humanlike entity inside, the mind or spirit. The inner mind was ascribed all the qualities that were observable in public actions. In effect, the behavior of people was "explained" by assuming that each person contained another little person. This is obviously not a very promising explanatory strategy, since the only possible explanation for the behavior of the little homunculus inside would be an even smaller homunculus inside the first---
then another inside the second, and so on, ad infinitum, like Russian nesting dolls. Since all the Greeks' other animist explanations of nature have seemed inadequate, we should undoubtedly be suspicious of dualism from the start.

Dualism has a number of other logical difficulties. My account of these difficulties is inspired by some philosophical criticisms, especially those of Gilbert Ryle and Ludwig Wittgenstein, but I am not a philosopher and have certainly not captured the subtleties of their philosophical positions, nor have I worried about professional criticisms of their positions. An excellent discussion of Jamesian theories from a professional philosopher's perspective is a book by Jesse Prinz (2004).

## THE PROBLEM OF PSYCHOPHYSICAL CAUSATION

Perhaps the most serious of dualism's problems is how the mind might affect the body, or the reverse. The metaphor of horse and rider actually hides the fact that unlike the rider, the mind has no hands to hold the reins or heels to kick the horse-body's sides. The mind is so insubstantial
that it seems to be completely the wrong kind of thing to affect the physical body. In fact, when one considers the issue carefully, the effect of the mind from "inside" a physical body is no less mysterious than the claimed
"psi" effects of mind on external physical objects. Whether I am moving my fingers or bending spoons and lifting tables, just how my immaterial mind could affect physical objects is unclear.

## INTROSPECTION AND THE PROBLEM OF SELF-IGNORANCE AND SELF-DECEPTION

A second problem concerns the ways in which commonsense dualism assumes we know about the minds of others and ourselves. According to dualism, these are two radically different processes. We know about the psychological states of other people by observing and interpreting their actions. We look at what people do in various situations, and we "infer"
what their motives, emotions, attitudes, and so forth must have been when they acted as they did. In contrast to these inferences about others, commonsense dualism assumes that we know our own psychological states by a very different route: We just "feel" them directly. This is a kind of direct, unmediated experience of introspection.

The problem with the idea of introspection is that it implies that we should know ourselves with perfect ease and accuracy, whereas we all know that we (or at least many of our friends and relations) are not nearly so self-aware. Indeed, many human attributes can exist only because we are ignorant of our own natures. For example, the type A personality/emotional bully cannot recognize his own anger. The "honest" hypocrite (most are) must not recognize how his own behavior contrasts with his professed standards for others. And perhaps most clearly, the vain person cannot recognize the actual level of his skills and accomplishments.

Of course, the fact that people are not particularly good judges of their own natures is hardly news, and many explanations of self-ignorance have been proposed. Self-perception theory probably provides the simplest, most straightforward: Our knowledge of ourselves is exactly like our knowledge of others, and hence our knowledge of ourselves is subject to all the same problems of inattention, distraction, prejudice, and self-serving misinterpretation. What is not necessary from the self-perception perspective is any elaborate machinery of active repression and defense mechanisms, all humming away in a hidden part of our minds.

## THE PROBLEM OF LEARNING HOW TO TALK ABOUT FEELINGS

Wittgenstein (1953) pointed out that it was hardly surprising that we did not know ourselves very well, since it was quite unclear how we could ever learn to correctly name and identify our feelings if they were entirely the product of the intrinsically private introspection of some inner reality.

Everything else we talk about has a public, if complex, referent, but
supposedly our feelings are of entirely private things that only we can observe. How, then, could we ever learn the proper names of these inner entities and how they relate to the behavior of other people?
Of course, in a general sense, we know how we learn to talk about and understand our feelings: Our parents and other adults teach us how, just as they teach us to talk about and understand everything else in the world. But our parents do not have access to our inner emotional entities. Instead, they know what our emotional states are by observing our behavior, our circumstances, or both (Bem, 1972; Laird & Berglas, 1975). When they see us scowling or observe that a playmate has just taken our favorite toy, they understand that we are angry, and they say something like, "Don't be angry."
The question is how this process could lead us to associate our parents'
talk with some inner state or condition, rather than with our behavior or our situation. All the other entities our parents tell us about have some referent in the public world, so why would we make a radically new kind of association for just these words? Furthermore, we would not need to form this new and difficult kind of association. Clearly, if our parents can talk sense about our emotions, the information that they use is adequate. If they use only information from our behavior and our situation, we do not seem to need anything more.

Notice, too, that if we had some interior introspective entities to associate with our parents' naming, we would be unlikely to learn to name these interior entities without error. The errors would arise because, unless our parents are absolutely accurate in interpreting our inner reality every time, there would be a closer association between their naming and the information they are using---our behavior and our situation---than between their naming and our private, internal products of introspection. Thus, if we as children associated the names with the private entities inside, we would in fact be making a mistake, as our parents understood it. We might even expect them to correct us when we talked about any feelings that did not fit their understanding of our behavior or the situation. The net result of this kind of process is that our parents would teach us to ignore the private inner world of introspection when we talk, and instead attend to our actions and their circumstances.

Faced with these problems about feelings and understanding, but simultaneously wanting to preserve the idea of logically private feelings, many people assume that feelings parallel actions in perfect harmony. If so, then perhaps we learn to attend to the feelings because they are more salient and obvious than the behaviors and situational constraints to which our parents are attending. But this solution solves one mystery by replacing it with an even greater mystery: Why would people be constructed so that they have two parallel lives, one public and one private, neither affecting the other, but each nonetheless exquisitely fitted with the other?
The problem of how feelings and behaviors can march together, keeping excellent if not quite perfect step, dissolves if the feelings are about the behaviors. If we feel happy because it is our way of recognizing that we
are smiling, or depressed because it is how we feel our body's torpor and our drooping face, then of course they go together. They go together in the same way that your smile goes with my perception of you as happy.

These and a number of other kinds of concerns about commonsense dualism have led to a variety of alternative proposals (e.g., some recent philosophical examples include Churchland, 1988; Dennett, 1991; Searle, 1992). None of these alternatives has won universal acceptance, but at a minimum, the number of alternatives and the effort devoted to developing them signal the degree of discomfort that philosophers still feel about conventional dualism.

## SELF-PERCEPTION THEORY

The many logical difficulties with commonsense dualism led philosophers such as Ryle (1949) and Wittgenstein (1953) and behaviorist psychologists such as B. F. Skinner (1957) to propose that in fact no separate realm of mind existed, or indeed could exist. Instead, they argued, our psychological entities consisted only of complex patterns of our essentially public kinds of action and the contexts in which these actions occurred. In this view, feelings are our recognition of these complex patterns of our actions and the situations in which we performed them. The position advocated by Ryle and Wittgenstein is essentially like William James's theory of emotion, but gen-eralized to all kinds of feelings and, in fact, all kinds of self-knowledge.

Daryl Bem (1967, 1972) introduced the name self-perception for the process of self-observation and interpretation by which our feelings were generated.

As he put it, we are in the same position as an outside observer of ourselves, and we must infer our own psychological states from our actions.1
Self-perception theory solves all the problems of dualism quite straightforwardly. First of all, we do not need to worry about how feelings may cause behaviors; feelings are about behaviors but do not cause them, in the same way that our perceptions of the physical world do not cause that world. Note, too, that it is not that the causal arrow has simply been reversed, because the relationship between behaviors and feelings is not causal, but rather constitutive. We will return to that issue in a moment.

Second, there is no problem about how we learn to talk about our own psychological states because we learn to know ourselves in the same way our parents originally did, and we, too, use our behavior and our situation as the source for our feelings. Finally, we can make mistakes because this process is no more infallible than any other attempt to make sense of things in the world.

## BASIC FEATURES OF SELF-PERCEPTION THEORY

Self-perception theory conflicts with common sense in the same way that James's theory of emotion does: by reversing the temporal sequence between feelings and actions. Since self-perception theory conflicts with common sense on an even broader front, it faces even more consistent and
powerful skepticism. In order to reduce that skepticism slightly at the beginning, a few essential but often misunderstood features of self-perception theory need to be underlined.

First of all, the process of self-observation and self-interpretation that is implicit in the self-perception label is explicitly assumed to be nonconscious (Bem, 1972; Laird, 1989; Laird & Bresler, 1992; Laird & Crosby, 1974). Like the processes that generate impressions of others (Bargh, 1997; Gilbert, 1989), these self-perception processes are also automatic.

The "perception" part of the name should be taken seriously. Good analogues to the proposed process are complex perceptual processes, like depth perception (Laird, 1989; Laird & Bresler, 1992). In depth perception, one "immediately" experiences a feature of the world, such as the relative distance of all the objects in it. As we are having these experiences of depth, we do not know how we do it, and we do not know what information we use to do it. Similarly, as we all know, we just feel that we are happy, or that we like a political candidate, or that we are hungry, and we have no idea where these feelings come from or how they emerge.

Self-perception theory assumes that feelings like these are higher order integrations of various kinds of cues. As with depth perception, the process of detecting and integrating these cues is automatic and occurs outside consciousness. The work of self-perception research is to discover the nature of the cues and how they generate experience.

In the case of depth perception, we do know quite a bit about the cues and processes that generate our experience. The experience of depth depends on a variety of cues, such as linear perspective, gradients of texture and color, binocular disparity, and motion parallax. A typical experiment to demonstrate the role of these cues involves manipulating one cue while holding the others constant and asking participants to report what they see. Often the result of such a manipulation is an illusion: One sees a two-dimensional line drawing of a cube as three-dimensional.

Typical self-perception research is logically identical. Some behavior that is thought to be a constituent of a feeling is manipulated, and the participant is asked what he or she feels. Harold Kelley (1967) once described one kind of self-perception experiment as precisely intended to create a kind of feeling-illusion, similar in every logical respect to a perceptual illusion. Such feeling illusions have the same logical force as well: If we can create an illusory experience by manipulating a cue, then that cue is probably important in the creation of normal, real-life experiences.

Depth perception and the self-perception of feelings are also similar in that, in real life, a multitude of potential cues contribute to the final experience, but no one of these is necessary for that final experience. One can experience depth in an Escher drawing that uses linear perspective alone, or in a picture of a field of sunflowers that contains only texture gradients, or by using binocular disparity or motion parallax on featureless objects.

Similarly, experiments have demonstrated that the experience of sadness can be produced by adopting a sad facial expression or a sad posture (Duclos et al., 1989), or by repeating sad sentences to oneself (Velten, 1968). Of course, both in real-life visual perceptions and in emotional feelings, all or many of these cues are usually available and are combined in some way.

## SELF-PERCEPTION AS CONSTRUCTIVE

An important conceptual drift has occurred over the last few pages and needs to be acknowledged. The quotation from William James that began this discussion emphasizes a causal connection between behavior and feeling. However, the relationship between behaviors and feelings seems to be constitutive. Feelings are constructed from cues that include behavioral and situational information.

The parallel with depth perception is exact here, too. The relationship between the cues for depth perception and the experience of depth is not causal. Lines converging in the "distance" or different images in each eye do not cause an experience of distance in the same way that the impact of one billiard ball causes the movement of another. Instead, these cues provide the ingredients from which the experience of depth is constructed.

That is, the experiences are "built" from the elements of the behaviors.

The difference between a causal and a constitutive relationship will be discussed at length later. One good example involves a load of lumber that was delivered to my house. The lumber caused a dented, dead patch of grass on my lawn, but it did not cause the room that was added to my house. The lumber was instead the material from which, assembled in a particular configuration, the house was constructed. Similarly, feelings are constructed out of the experiences of acting in particular ways in particular circumstances.

In sum, self-perception theory holds that our feelings consist of the perception of higher order patterns of our behaviors and the situations in which we are behaving. Neither the process of self-perception nor the cues that enter that process are ordinarily recognizable in everyday experiences. It is precisely the purpose of self-perception research to identify those cues and processes.

## SELF-PERCEPTION AS RELATIONAL, NOT CAUSAL

The role of the situation in self-perception constitutes another aspect of the difference between James's view and self-perception theory, a difference that requires emphasis. A major component of the relationship that constitutes feelings is between the behaviors emphasized by James and the social and physical context in which the behaviors occur. A smile in relationship with the arrival of a friend constitutes happiness, but a smile in relationship to the arrival of a relative given to lengthy descriptions of her
medical problems may constitute the feeling of anxious boredom. An identical movement of the mouth when the dentist approaches may produce no feelings at all. It appears that the "default interpretation" of emotional behaviors is the feeling of the corresponding emotion, but countless studies have demonstrated that these behaviors can be disqualified by information that defines a different relationship or none at all.

## VARIETIES OF CUES FOR FEELINGS

James identified emotional behaviors such as smiling, crying, a slumped dejected posture, or an attack as the source of the cues for emotional feelings. Much of the research described in subsequent chapters supports his view that the important behaviors are overt and easily observed. The behaviors that lead to the more basic emotions such as joy, anger, and fear are especially easy to observe in others. However, for some feelings, such as boredom (Damrad-Frye & Laird, 1989) or familiarity (Jacoby, Kelley, Brown,
& Jasechko, 1989), the cues are not overt behaviors. The essence of the self-perception insight is not that all feelings are about overt behavior but simply that they are constituted from and are about some underlying process.

That is, they are based on and provide information about the relationship between some activity of the person and its context. Often that activity is some sort of cognitive processing or act. For example, the feeling of boredom is about the inability of the person to keep his or her attention focused where it is supposed to be. The feeling of familiarity, that one has experienced something before, is based in part on the fluency with which the experience proceeds, in comparison to the expected fluency.

In addition to the wide variety of behavioral cues that participate in feelings, there are also cues arising from the situation in which we are behaving. Our understanding of what is common and appropriate in a particular situation may be just as important in generating feelings. For example, people might feel sad if they were attending a funeral, even if the deceased was a stranger, and happy when attending a party, even if they were only observing the festivities from a corner of the room. As noted earlier, self-perception theory assumes that we learn to feel by learning to make sense of the two kinds of information that our parents are using to teach us about feelings: our actions and the situations in which we are acting.

In principle, everyone might use both set of cues equally, but in fact, numerous studies to be described in later chapters make it clear that people differ in which of these two sources is most influential. These individual differences have some interesting relationships with other phenomena. For reasons that will become apparent, we have called the two kinds of cues situational and personal. People who are more responsive to personal cues are more likely to report feelings consistent with their behaviors, and they are more sensitive to pain; in addition, if they are women, they are more likely to experience premenstrual syndrome. In contrast, people who are less responsive to personal cues instead respond to the situational cues that lead

to conformity. It appears that virtually everyone is responsive to situational cues, but that people differ in their responses to personal cues. When in later chapters I refer to people who are more responsive to personal cues, I do not mean that they are unresponsive to situational cues, but only that they respond more strongly to personal cues. People who are identified as more responsive to situational cues are so primarily because they seem to be unresponsive to personal cues.

## COGNITIONS ABOUT THE SITUATION, COGNITIONS ABOUT THE BEHAVIOR

A person's understanding of the situation plays a second, very different role. In addition to providing information about how most people would feel in the particular situation, the situation is the usual source of the context for the behavior. These two kinds of information arising from the social situation play different roles in the feeling processes and must not be confused. One kind of information about the situation is about the nature and meaning of the emotional stimulus. For example, at the lowest, perceptual level, William James's bear is only a blob of dark fur ambling into the room; if one has no idea that bears are dangerous, one will not feel fear.

Even when you know all about the dangers of the bear in front of you, you will not be afraid if you also recognize how strong are the bars of the cage between you. So, one function of cognitions is to provide the understanding or appraisal of the event that is the occasion for an emotional episode.2
These are cognitions about the situation that produces emotional behavior.

Equally important are the cognitions about the behaviors and their contexts. A smile in response to a photographer's request that you say "Cheese"
is less likely to make you feel happy, and a pounding heart and sweaty palms will be less disturbing if you realize they are the product of too many cups of coffee. In fact, a feeling of happiness is not a direct consequence of the smile, but rather is a product of the relationship between the smile and the context in which it occurs. The default interpretation of a smile appears to be happiness, and the default interpretation of a frown is anger, but both can be disqualified easily. A substantial portion of the literature to be reviewed in later chapters demonstrates the ways in which manipulations of contextual understandings of behavior change its impact on feelings.

## EXPERIENCES: THE OBJECTS OF SELF-PERCEPTION THEORY

Any reasonably complex psychological episode may include a variety of distinguishable components, such as the situation, the person's interpretations of the situation, and his or her many reactions to that interpretation, including memories, judgments, feelings, expressive behaviors, physiological responses, and actions. Of this wide array, self-perception theory is directed only at explaining feelings. The theory involves all these other kinds of responses, as they make feelings possible or necessary and are
affected by feelings. Yet the theory is not an attempt to explain more than the origins of feelings. As we will see in later chapters, that is more than enough for one theory, both because the task is substantial and because the implications of self-perception theory reverberate widely.

By feelings, I mean precisely what the person in the street would mean by feelings. That is, I mean the everyday conscious experiences of anger and joy, liking and disliking, hunger and thirst, sickness and confidence. I mean the kinds of things that people think about when asked, "How do you feel?" and talk about in answer to the question. People may act emotionally without knowing that they are, but it is simply true by definition that they cannot feel without knowing that they feel. Feelings are the conscious experience.

Although we all know and talk about feelings easily, there is a complexity that we often overlook. If you were to ask me how I am feeling right now, I can respond readily with "Contented, focused, enjoying the task," but these words are not the feelings. They are only labels for the feelings. They are complex, meaningful labels, but they are descriptions of what I am feeling. The feelings are like any other sensory experience, ultimately impossible to describe (Lambie & Marcel, 2002; Reisenzein & Schonpflug, 1992). These two kinds of knowledge were called "knowledge by acquaintance" and "knowledge by description" by Bertrand Russell (1912). Knowledge by description is what you have when I tell you that
"an apple is round, red, and sweet." Knowledge by experience is what you acquire when you taste the apple. Ever afterward you may be able to identify apples by their taste, but you will never be able to describe the taste (except perhaps by the kinds of obscure analogies that wine tasters use).

Similarly, to label one's emotional feeling as "angry" is a different thing from experiencing the forward-rushing, tension filled, body-charged, teeth-gritted urge to hurt that is the feeling of anger. The first is knowledge by description, the second is knowledge by acquaintance (which is why I can only allude to it and not truly describe it in this example).

Now that we have separated conceptually the two kinds of emotional processes, it is clear that self-perception theory is concerned primarily with the first, or lower knowledge by acquaintance. The knowledge by acquaintance in turn provides the occasion for the labeling and discussion that make up knowledge by description, which is in its turn the basis of our self-reports. However, the two kinds of knowledge certainly are intertwined; for instance, a label may serve to highlight some aspects of one's "acquaintance experience" and distract from others. Notice, incidentally, that we are ordinarily unaware of the difference between our knowledges of acquaintance and description because we ordinarily take our descriptions of our feelings as adequately complete descriptions.

Among highly verbal people, the word is often taken to be sufficient, perhaps precisely because those aspects of the experience that are picked out by the verbal description become the focus, and the ineffable remainder are overlooked.

Three distinct opportunities for inaccuracy in our self-descriptions of ourselves are now clear as well. The first potential problem may occur because we are enacting an emotional pattern of behaviors, but we are unaware of these behaviors as they are going on because we are either distracted or perhaps neurologically impaired. We do not even have an "acquaintance experience" of the behaviors. The second possibility is that we may also in some way apprehend the behaviors sufficiently to have the perceptual "acquaintance experience" but fail to label it correctly or at all. In this case, we may be feeling our behaviors accurately but labeling them incorrectly.

A third possibility for error may creep in between the initial labeling and the actual report to others. For example, participants in experiments are usually eager to be helpful and might report whatever feelings they believed the experimenter wished to hear. These reports might be quite different if they were telling their friends about the experiment later.

## METHODS FOR STUDYING FEELINGS

The study of feelings poses some special methodological problems because of these gaps between feelings and final report. The most obvious problems arise because the only way we can tell what someone is feeling is to ask him. The problem with self-reports is, of course, that the person may not report his feelings accurately. In all the self-perception research programs to be discussed in later chapters, the experimenters were very much aware of the danger that participants would be too cooperative and so took various measures to minimize the possibility. Since most of these defensive procedures are specific to the particular research programs, they are best described in the later chapters. However, I would not want to leave any doubt about this issue as you are reading about the research, so I will quickly summarize the kinds of procedures that have been employed.

First of all, the participants were often elaborately deceived about the actual purposes of the research, so that they would not know what they were expected to do. Whenever possible, the experimenter was left in the dark as well, at least about whether a particular participant was expected to do one thing or another. In addition, usually participants were carefully interviewed after the experiment was over to discover whether they had seen through the deception.

In other experiments the manipulations were so cleverly disguised that no participant could perceive their purpose. In some kinds of research the critical variables were autonomic responses such as heart rate and skin conductance that even the most eager-to-please participants could not deliberately control. Finally, many relationships were predicted, and observed, between self-reports of feeling and other variables that participants could not have known their position on, such as whether they were field dependent or not, or could not have changed, such as whether they were overweight. In studies of this sort, some participants were expected to respond in one way, others in a different way, and the experimenter was
blind as to which kind of response a particular participant should make.

Thus, no consistent pattern of experimenter bias and participant compliance could have produced the observed results. Furthermore, in many of these studies, "faking" correctly would have required the participants themselves to discern very specific and anti-intuitive theoretical predictions about how they should behave. In sum, and as will become apparent as I discuss the actual research, few if any of these results can be explained away as due to participant compliance.

Some perspective on the risks posed by eager participants comes with the recognition that this problem is not unique to research on emotions, motives, or attitudes. For example, when a perception researcher shows participants the Muller-Lyer illusion and asks which line seems longer, the researcher must depend on the truthfulness of the participants' reports.

In fact, self-reports are like any measure of an entity that is not directly observable by the scholar's senses. Confidence in any measure of a complex, abstract entity develops through construct validation. That is, we make theoretically guided predictions about how the underlying entity and its measurement would relate to other measures or events in the world. To the extent that our measures behave in the way that the theory predicted, we gain some confidence in each component, the theory that made the prediction, the theoretical construct that was part of this theory, and the practical measurement of this construct. For example, self-perception theory predicted that women who were more responsive to personal cues would report feeling lowered self-confidence while reading women's magazines (Wilcox & Laird, 2000). When we found that after reading the magazine, the predicted group of women responded to a self-esteem scale with lower scores, we felt more confident about our theory, and also about our measurements of personal and situational cue use and of self-esteem.

One such success conveys only a small bit of confidence in the measures, but repeated successes justify increasing confidence.

Certainly, in the case of self-reports of feelings, the construct validation work has been done long ago. Literally thousands of experiments have used self-report measures of feelings and observed the expected relationships. In fact, few, if any, psychological constructs and measures have accumulated greater stores of construct-validational confidence.

Of course, occasionally self-report measurement of feelings may err.

A participant may lie to please or confound the experimenter, just as occasionally an intelligence test may fail to identify a good student, or an ohm meter may not measure electrical resistance correctly. It is a hallmark of an adequately validated measure/theory complex that it contains, at least implicitly, the criteria for identifying the occasional exception to its usual good functioning.

Although we have strong theoretical and empirical grounds for relying on self-reports about feelings, we should recognize that self-reports are, of course, distinct from the feelings reported. As noted earlier, there is clearly more to experience than we talk about, and perhaps ever could talk about.

For example, when I look at a painting, I could say that I feel peaceful and enraptured by what I see. My words do not begin to capture all that I am feeling, just as when I say that the picture depicts a three-dimensional landscape, those words do not capture all the experiences that come from the juxtaposition of objects in the three-dimensional "space" of the picture.

Experiences of physical space and of feelings are complex and multidimensional (e.g., deRivera, 1977; Ortony, Clore, & Collins, 1988). How much of that complexity we try to capture in verbal reports is, of course, a matter of what our theoretical purpose is.

## FEELINGS ARE NOT EPIPHENOMENA

A number of observers have misunderstood self-perception theory and/or Jamesian theories of emotion as assuming that emotional feelings are epiphenomena that have no effect on behavior (e.g., Oatley & Jenkins, 1992). Certainly, the main point of self-perception theory is that the behaviors that commonsense claims are caused by emotion are instead the source of those feelings. But just because the feelings do not cause these particular behaviors does not mean that feelings have no role in behavior.

Indeed, feelings seem to have an essential role in the behavior that follows. Just what that role is will, of course, vary from situation to situation, but one major effect is to permit self-control (Laird & Apostoleris, 1996).

The nature of these effects will be discussed at length in a later chapter.

Self-perception theory does raise two questions that were obscured by commonsense dualism and its professional counterparts. In commonsense dualism, many behaviors are explained by the presumed causal influence of their antecedent feeling. However, if the feeling follows and is not the cause, then one must ask why the behaviors occurred.

The general shape of the answer to this question follows from asking what feelings are. The research indicates that feelings are about actions and are really a kind of information. Just as the feeling of distance and the spatial organization of objects is information about the world, feelings of emotion, motivation, and so on are information about one's ongoing behavior and the circumstances in which it occurs. The question of the role of feelings in action then becomes the question of how information might affect behavior.

This, too, is a rather knotty question that often has been overlooked or obscured by the assumption that behaviors are caused by mental states.

The best answers to all these questions seem to depend on adopting a somewhat different view of the nature of the human "mechanism." Implicit in the commonsense view of feelings is a model of the human being as a rather simple machine, like a clock or an automobile. At least until recently, automobiles consisted essentially of a set of mechanisms for the transformation of the energy in gasoline into mechanical energy, and the transmission of that energy from the motor to the wheels. The automobile was, in essence, a "one-way" machine in which the flow ran only from the motor to the wheels. This machine had no capacity to monitor its own activities,
much less to alter or adjust them to meet new conditions. This latter function was provided by the driver, who decided where to go, observed the road and road conditions, and manipulated accelerator, clutch, and steer-ing wheel to get there. For the first decades of automobiles, the driver even had to adjust the choke and spark-advance to match the engine temperature during starting and, once the car was going, had to decide when to shift gears, based on the speed of the car, and to depress the accelerator more or less depending on the desired speed and the slope of the road.

The parallel between this view of automobiles and drivers and the dualist view of human beings is obvious. Since our bodies demonstrably include many "one-way" processes like muscle contractions, they do not seem able to monitor and adjust the activities of the person. That is the job of the driver/mind.

More modern, complex machines (including at least some aspects of modern automobiles) are quite different and provide a very different analogy. These machines are constructed so that they are constantly altering and adjusting their own functions. The self-adjusting processes of the automobile computer modules include automatic adjustment of spark advance and choke during starting, automatic shifting between gears, and, in many cars, automatic control of speed. Indeed, all that remains for the driver is to keep the car on the road, and "smart" roads and larger computers in the car may soon take over that function as well.

These more complex machines do their magic because they contain control systems that gather and use information about the automobile's actions and its circumstances, so that activities can be adjusted to match circumstances. These are the familiar "negative feedback loops" in which information about the effects of an action, and of any environmental perturbations, is fed back to a mechanism that can in turn adjust the actions.

If we adopt this more cybernetic model of human beings (Carver & Scheier, 1981, 1998; Powers, 1973), then feelings can be seen immediately to be parts of just such a control system. As such, they are absolutely essential to the shaping of subsequent action. This is not a causal role, but rather a cybernetic, control-process role. Feelings are not the forces that produce actions; instead, they are the feedback information about the effects of those actions, information that permits the control and shaping of action. Feelings are like information feeding back to the computer module that the speed is slowing and more gasoline is required. Thus, feelings are not at all like the force of exploding gasoline in the car motor.

In sum, self-perception theory appears to have added some new, apparently difficult questions. We have to give up our easy assumption that feelings are the causes of much behavior, and that feelings act like forces exerting hydraulic pressures that generate action. Instead, we are left with questions about what feelings are, and how they could have any effect.

The answers to be proposed in later chapters are certainly not complete, and some must be quite tentative. However, one of the major attractions of self-perception theory is precisely that it raises such questions.

## A COMMENT TO THE READER

My goal in this book is to persuade the reader that the self-perception view of feelings is very well supported, by many different strands of research, involving hundreds of individual experiments and observations.

My persuasive goal leads to a mild conflict, because at least three audiences exist and seem to deserve somewhat different arguments. For years I have spoken at other psychology departments and professional meetings about some of this research and the theory that emerges from the research. Some years ago the universal reaction (even in my own department) seemed to be tolerant skepticism---"There goes Laird again, on that crazy self-perception idea." The strong skeptics are still the largest audience. In addition, many nonpsychologists may be unaware of the self-perception perspective but might benefit from knowledge of it. For these two groups, who are not specialists in feelings research, I have included both a relatively large selection of studies and some relatively leisurely descriptions of some key studies.

The second group is social psychologists. My impression is that most social psychologists are aware that many self-perception-like phenomena occur, but they tend to believe that self-perception effects are rare. Following Bem's caution in his early statements, they believe that self-perception takes place only "to the extent that internal cues are weak, ambiguous, or uninterpretable" (Bem, 1972, p. 2). Most social psychologists seem to believe that internal cues are rarely so useless.

Finally, during my recent experiences talking to professional groups, I have encountered a small, but I hope growing, number who are sympathetic to self-perception ideas. Antonio Damasio's (1994, 1999) recent adoption of a variant of self-perception theory has certainly helped. I have been struck, however, that even among this obviously wise and thoughtful group, many are apparently unaware of how much supportive research already exists. My apologies to these last two groups if they sometimes feel an urge to tell me to "get on with it." And now I had best do so.

## PLAN OF THE BOOK

I have already described the theoretical structure into which I will fit all this research. At the beginning, I would only ask the reader to keep in mind that rejecting self-perception theory will leave behind a need to account in some other way for the large body of research described here. A wide variety of alternative explanations have been offered for different, small portions of this research. However, at some point, one must question whether a multitude of widely different, often strained, and usually post hoc explanations are preferable to something like self-perception theory.

Self-perception theory contradicts common sense but otherwise is an elegant integration of a wide range of unexpected findings.

The largest and most coherent body of research on feelings concerns emotional feelings, and that seems to be the best place to start. Because there is so much research on this topic, it has been divided into four chapters. Chapter 2 concerns facial expressions. It describes many studies in which people were induced to adopt facial expressions and then reported corresponding feelings. Chapter 3 deals with a variety of other emotional behaviors, such as postures, patterns of gaze and breathing, and actions, which have the same effects on feelings as do expressions. Chapter 4 discusses the role of autonomic responses in emotion. The conclusion here is that autonomic activity does affect some emotions, but certainly not all.

Chapter 5, on emotions, expands on the implications of individual differences in self-perception processes and describes an integrated view of emotional processes.

Chapter 6 discusses research on the role of behavior in feelings of confidence, pride, and self-evaluation. Standing and sitting tall does make you feel proud (Stepper & Strack, 1993) and confident (Kuvalanka, Grubstein, Kim, Nagaraja, & Laird, 1994)!
Chapter 7 deals with two aspects of motives. The first concerns the extensive research on hunger and eating that demonstrates that feelings of hunger are complex self-perceptions that are based on mixtures of cues from inside and outside one's body. The second topic in the motives chapter concerns the research on intrinsic versus extrinsic motivation. The overjustification effect and other effects of external justifications on pro-ductivity and creativity all seem to represent self-perception processes.

Chapter 8 discusses a loosely related group of research programs that have developed quite independently of self-perception theory, but which share its basic insight. This research has looked at various kinds of "cognitive feelings." These are feelings about our mental processes. A familiar example is the "tip-of-the-tongue" feeling that you know something, even though you cannot at the moment remember it. Another is the feeling of familiarity that tells you that you have encountered something before, although you cannot recall when. Feelings of this sort turn out to be based on our self-perception of a variety of features of our remembering processes, such as the ease with which we can begin to process the stimulus object.

Chapter 9 deals with the feelings of liking and disliking, or attitudes.

First I discuss the extensive literature inspired by cognitive dissonance theory, which was later reinterpreted by Bem (1967, 1972) as representing self-perception. Although some of this research does not seem to fit self-perception theory, a considerable amount does (Fazio, 1987). Also discussed in that chapter is the foot-in-the-door technique, which may create attitudes, as well as recent work on attitude "creation" through actions.

Chapter 10 is a summary and integration of all the research, organized around four broad questions about self-perception research and theory.

The first, and by far the most basic, is simply whether self-perception occurs---does acting lead to feeling? A relatively methodological question follows close behind: Are the effects observed in self-perception research real, or are they perhaps artifacts of the procedures? The most frequently suggested artifactual explanation is some variant of experimenter bias. If self-perception effects occur, and are not due to experimenter bias, two further conditions must be met if we are to adopt self-perception theory.

The first is that actions must be not only sufficient to produce feelings but also necessary. We need some evidence that feelings cannot occur without prior actions. Finally, we need some evidence that self-perception processes occur in real life, not just the laboratory.

In chapter 11, I describe more fully a view of human beings that emerges from the research and from Ryle's approach to the problem of mind and body.

If at any time while reading you begin to feel skeptical or distressed by my arguments, I hope that you will pause for a moment and smile, as deeply and naturally as you can. You may find all your negative feelings dissolving into happiness.

NOTES 1. Bem was actually a little more cautious. His explicit statements of self-perception principles assert that we infer our psychological states from our behavior "to the extent that internal cues are weak, ambiguous, or uninterpretable"
(Bem, 1972, p. 2). This qualification raises the question of what internal cues might consist of. Bem did not seem to mean that internal cues were the products of introspection, so the basic self-perception position is not seriously changed by this qualification. 2. Appraisal theories have a long and important history in theories and research on emotion (e.g., Arnold, 1960). Such theories seek to identify the properties of events in the world (real, remembered, or imagined) that generate emotional episodes. Appraisal theories are about the processes that inform us that the bear is strong, has large teeth, and has a crabby disposition.
