To obtain approval to market a new drug in the United States, Canada, the European Union, and most other countries, a series of clinical trials on patients is required. The extent of the trials depends on the drug ,the disease or indication treated, the nature of the patients studied, experience in other countries where it is already sold, and other factors.

After the appropriate pharmacology and toxicology testing in vitro and in animals, development of small-scale and sometimes larger-scale manufacturing procedures, and other preparatory testing, the drug is ready to be used in humans in the so-called first in man, or first in humans, study. In the United States, a company submits an Investigational New Drug Application (IND) to the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)  containing the preparatory data. This is, in most cases, data that are proprietary and not available to the public. In addition, the submitter includes in the package a protocol for a clinical trial in humans. Drug trials are heavily regulated, and multiple layers of protections and precautions have been developed to protect the subjects. These include investigational review boards, data safety monitoring boards, sponsor and health authority scrutiny, and some level of public notification and publicizing of the study on the internet (clinical trial registries). Trials are divided into four phases, although there is usually some overlap.

Phase 1 trials actually belong to human pharmacology, in contrast to animal pharmacology. These are the first steps in determining the profile of both the beneficial and the untoward effects in humans. They are designed mainly to find the maximum tolerated dose and the pathways for metabolizing and eliminating the drug. Safety is more important in this phase than efficacy. The first study is often a single-dose trial in a small number (e.g., a dozen) of healthy, often male (to avoid any possible pregnancy issues), volunteers. If tolerated, a multiple-dose study and a rising-dose study follow. The aim of phase I trials is to study absorption, distribution in the body, metabolism, and excretion (so-called ADME studies) as well as safety and toxicity.

Other things that may be examined include the proposed formulation to be used in subsequent trials and marketing (as they may be different) and the dosing frequency or schedule. Drug interaction studies may be done in phase I or later in phase II. If the drugs are known to be toxic or have severe and predictable ADRs, these studies are often done for ethical reasons in patients with the disease to be treated rather than in healthy volunteers (e.g., cancer chemotherapy or AIDS). Each study is short, often running no more than a few days to a few weeks at most. The trial design is usually simple and open label. They may or may not be controlled. Several phase I studies often take a year or so and may include around 100 patients in total.

There is usually no benefit to the subjects in the trial, and they participate either because of generosity of spirit or because they are paid. Because there is no gain to the individual subjects, all efforts are made to minimize the risk of toxicity. Serious adverse events are usually rare in phase I trials. Subjects are often “housed” for these studies in special clinical research centers run by academic medical centers or clinical research organizations (CROs). Note that the term subjects in this context usually refers to “normal people,” not patients. The term patients is usually used to refer to people with the disease in question and not “normal” people. Hence, phase I trials usually involve healthy subjects, and phase II, III, and IV trials involve patients. This distinction is not always followed, and some use the terms interchangeably.

Adverse events seen in phase I trials are always noteworthy because the subjects are usually normal and a low starting dose of the drug in question is usually used. Because few subjects are studied in phase I, any AE should be investigated thoroughly. SAEs and the rare death seen in phase I trials should be looked at immediately, and if the event is severe, stopping further dosing or enrollment should be considered. Note that the FDA now requires all serious AEs (whether labeled or not, whether felt to be due to the drug or not) to be submitted as expedited reports. In addition to the toxicity of the drug preparation, subjects have been known to hide serious medical problems or medical history to participate in the study, especially if the subjects are compensated.
