The ICH document Q8 describes in detail how excipients are handled in pharmaceuticals. See ICH’s website for the document (Web Resource 5-6). In the European Union, Volume 9A only refers to excipients in regard to altering PSUR cycles. There is no direct comment on AEs possibly related to fillers or excipients. Excipients in one country may be considered active ingredients in other countries and vice versa. As in the United States, the European Union, and elsewhere, Good Manufacturing Practices have detailed regulations and guidelines on excipients. In general, most countries require Quality Management systems and life cycle risk management for all products. Under this general heading, excipients are included. Thus, if a signal or safety issue should arise regarding an excipient, this is expected to be handled expeditiously. Most regulations require safety reporting for the entire product, not just the active moiety. Thus, adverse events seen with the drug product, whether due presumably to the active ingredient or an excipient, must be handled in the same way as expedited reports or periodic reports as required by regulation and law. The trick is to distinguish an AE due to an excipient rather than the active ingredient. If the former, the problem should be rectifiable, if the latter, then the event is a pharmacologic property of the drug and unlikely to be diminished with manufacturing changes.

## Placebo

As placebos are rarely used explicitly in clinical practice, this refers only to clinical trials. All AEs (whether to active drug, comparator, or placebo) must be captured and databased. The only issue is expedited reporting of placebo events. In the United States, placebo AEs from trials do not generally have to be reported as expedited reports. However, many blinded trials do have AEs (including serious AEs) reported as blinded events during the trial either as expedited reports or in periodic or annual reports. At the end of the study, the unblinding reveals some of them to be associated with placebo and not active drugs. In addition, in preparing final study reports, integrated safety sections for NDAs, dossiers for marketing approval in the European Union and elsewhere, and comparisons of AEs on active drug and placebo must be reported if there is a placebo arm of the trial. Thus, all placebo AEs should be recorded and tracked in the safety database. In the European Union, some countries require reporting of all AEs related to the “biomedical research,”not just to taking the active study drug. In this case, placebo cases need to be reported as expedited reports and in periodic summary reports. The European Union Clinical Trial Directive (2001/20/EC of April 4, 2001) defines an “investigational medicinal product” as “a pharmaceutical form of an active substance or placebo being tested or used in a clinical trial” and requires certain serious AEs to be reported as expedited reports. Some have read this to mean a requirement for placebo reporting. Volume 9A does not expressly address placebo reporting. In the United Kingdom, the “Clinical Trials Toolkit” from the United Kingdom Department of Health/Medical Research Council (Web Resource 5-7) states: For blinded trials involving a placebo and an active drug, seriousness, causality and expectedness should be evaluated as though the patient was on active drug. Cases that are considered serious, unexpected and possibly, probably or definitely related (i.e. possible SUSARs) would have to be unblinded. Only those events occurring among patients on the active drug (unless thought to be due to the excipient in the placebo) should be considered to be SUSARs requiring reporting to the regulatory authority and ethics committee. The Good Pharmacovigilance Practice Guide (MHRA Pharmaceutical Press, London, 2009, www.pharmapress. com), from the MHRA, also notes: For the purpose of triage of a SAR in a blinded trial, expectedness may be assessed initially using the assumption that the test drug has been given. If it is assessed as unexpected against the test drug reference document, it should be unblinded. If, following unblinding, it is seen that the clinical trial subject received the comparator drug, but the event still meets the criteria for a SUSAR, in that it is unexpected according to the comparator reference document (which should be defined in the protocol), then it should be expedited according to the requirements. . . and notified to the company that holds the marketing authorisation for the comparator drug. If, following unblinding, it is discovered that the IMP (investigational medical product) was a placebo, then this event will not require expedited reporting, unless in the opinion of the investigator or sponsor the event was related to a reaction to the placebo, for example an allergic reaction to an excipient (Section 12.3.7, page 140).
